docs: simply ADR-47 (#16150)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-047-extend-upgrade-plan.md

## Changelog

* Nov, 23, 2021: Initial Draft

> * Feb 15, 2023: Remove `pre_run` and `post_run` fields for simplifying the ADR

Author: This does not seem needed anymore, is that a correct assumption?

Reviewer: This ADR has been in the back of my mind for the last year+. To me, the only thing really worthwhile in it, is the `pre_run` and `post_run` stuff. Cosmovisor currently has support for running a `pre-upgrade` command on the new executable. Support for running an externally defined command before and/or after an upgrade would still be handy, though. An example pre-run is updating config files to a new format (e.g. when all the `-`s change to `_`s). An example post-run is sending a notification somewhere that a node is back up.

That being said, the `post_run` concept might be better as something a node can configure rather than something all nodes on a chain would run. I can't remember all of the use-cases previously thought of for it, though.

As for the `Artifact`s defined in this PR, I actually now think it's something that I _do not want_. We (at Provenance Blockchain) put a URL in the info field that returns the `UpgradeConfig` JSON. We've had a few instances where an upgrade proposal is submitted and passed, but before the upgrade height, we discover a major issue. Because the actual executable download URLs aren't in the proposal, we're able to change them to a version without the issue. Without this ability, it'd often be impossible to prevent the chain from upgrading to the problematic version.

If the `pre_run` and `post_run` parts are being removed from this ADR, I'd suggest getting rid of the ADR altogether.

> * Feb 15, 2023: Remove `pre_run` and `post_run` fields for simplifying the ADR

Author: ```suggestion
* May 15, 2023: Remove `pre_run` and `post_run` fields for simplifying the ADR
```

## Status

> ACCEPTED Implemented

Author: ```suggestion
ACCEPTED Not Implemented
```

## Abstract

This ADR expands the existing x/upgrade `Plan` proto message to include new fields for defining a structure for providing downloadable artifacts involved in an upgrade.

## Context

The `upgrade` module in conjunction with Cosmovisor are designed to facilitate and automate a blockchain's transition from one version to another.

Users submit a software upgrade governance proposal containing an upgrade `Plan`.

> The [Plan](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/proto/cosmos/upgrade/v1beta1/upgrade.proto#L13-L45) currently contains the following fields:

Reviewer: This link needs to be to a specific version instead of a link to whatever `main` currently has, specially since it include line numbers.

The current upgrade process has this timeline:

1. An upgrade governance proposal is submitted and approved.
2. The upgrade height is reached.
3. The `x/upgrade` module writes the `upgrade_info.json` file.
4. The chain halts.
5. Cosmovisor backs up the data directory (if set up to do so).
6. Cosmovisor downloads the new executable (if not already in place).
7. Cosmovisor executes the `${DAEMON_NAME} pre-upgrade`.
8. Cosmovisor restarts the app using the new version and same args originally provided.

## Decision

### Protobuf Updates

> The `x/upgrade.Plan` message is updated for providing upgrade artifacts. The artifacts available define each platform.

Reviewer: Since this is discussing things not yet done, it should be future tense. Also, the second sentence is weird to me. I'm not quite sure what it's trying to say.

```suggestion
The `x/upgrade.Plan` message will be updated to provide a list of artifacts, one for each available platform.
```

### Upgrade Module Updates

If an upgrade `Plan` does not use the new `Artifacts` field, existing functionality is maintained.
The parsing of the `info` field as either a URL or `binaries` JSON will be deprecated.
During validation, if the `info` field is used as such, a warning is issued, but not an error.

We will update the creation of the `upgrade-info.json` file to include the `Artifacts`.

We will update the optional validation available via CLI to account for the new `Plan` structure.
We will add the following validation:

> 1.  There MUST be at least one entry in `artifacts`.

Reviewer: This contradicts the claim that the new `artifacts` are optional.

      2. The `{checksum}` from the query parameter MUST equal the `checksum` provided in the `Artifact`.
      3. The `{checksum_algo}` from the query parameter MUST equal the `checksum_algo` provided in the `Artifact`.
2.  The following validation is currently done using the `info` field. We will apply similar validation to the `Artifact` field.
    For each `Artifact`:
    1. The `platform` MUST have the format `{OS}/{CPU}` or be `"any"`.
    2. The `url` field MUST NOT be empty.
    3. The `url` field MUST be a proper URL.
    4. A `checksum` MUST be provided either in the `checksum` field or as a query parameter in the `url`.
    5. If the `checksum` field has a value and the `url` also has a `checksum` query parameter, the two values MUST be equal.
    6. The `url` MUST return either a file or an archive containing either `bin/{DAEMON_NAME}` or `{DAEMON_NAME}`.
    7. If a `checksum` is provided (in the field or as a query param), the checksum of the result of the `url` MUST equal the provided checksum.

Downloading of an `Artifact` will happen the same way that URLs from `info` are currently downloaded.

### Cosmovisor Updates

> If the `upgrade-info.json` file does not contain any `Artifacts`, existing functionality are maintained.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `upgrade-info.json` file does not contain any `Artifacts`, existing functionality is maintained.
```

Cosmovisor is to be updated to look for and handle the new `Artifacts` in `upgrade-info.json`.
If the `Artifacts` are provided, the following should be done:

1. The `info` field is ignored.
2. The `artifacts` field is used to identify the artifact to download based on the `platform` that Cosmovisor is running in.
3. If a `checksum` is provided (either in the field or as a query param in the `url`), and the downloaded artifact has a different checksum, the upgrade process is interrupted and Cosmovisor will exit with an error.

The `info` field should be deprecated for anything other than human readable information.

> A warning is logged if the `info` field is used to define the assets (either by URL or JSON).

Reviewer: After thinking about this for the last year+, I don't think this deprecation is a good idea. The specific functionality being removed that is still needed, is the ability to provide a URL that returns the artifact download URLs. The new `artifacts` stuff requires the artifact download URLs to be directly in the upgrade plan.

## References

* [Current upgrade.proto](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/proto/cosmos/upgrade/v1beta1/upgrade.proto)
* [Upgrade Module README](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/x/upgrade/README.md)
* [Cosmovisor README](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/tools/cosmovisor/README.md)

> * [Pre-upgrade README](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/docs/docs/migrations/01-pre-upgrade.md)

Reviewer: The `Pre-upgrade README` link is incorrect. The old one still works, but I'm not sure where it was moved to now.

Also, these links need to be to specific version tags and not to `/main/` (or any other branch). They're here to provide context which is lost if the content changes later, or worse, the file moves and the link no longer works.
